---
author: jlordiales
comments: true
share: true
date: 2014-11-18
layout: post
title: Lambdas and Functional interfaces in Java 8
categories:
- Functional Programming
- Java 8
tags:
- Java
- Java 8
- Functional Programming
- Lambdas
- Functional interfaces
- Method reference
---

In the 
[previous post]({% post_url 2014-11-01-overview-java-8 %}) we saw an
overview of what functional programming is and how the new features of Java 8
allow developers to write their applications using a more functional style. One
of the main points in this new version of the language was the introduction of
lambdas. Together with lambdas came the use of functional interfaces and methods
references. This post will explore these features in more detail, showing
when to use them, the restrictions around them and how you can use them
to make your code more readable and concise.

# Lambdas
First things first, what is a lambda (or lambda expression)? A lambda is an
anonymous method that doesn't have a name but it has a list of parameters, a
body, a return type and potentially a list of exception that the lambda can
throw. Unlike regular class methods, lambdas are not actually associated with
any class. They can also be assigned to variables or passed as arguments to
other methods. The name _lambda expression_ comes from the field of
[mathematics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lambda_calculus).

We saw an example of a lambda expression in the 
[previous post]({% post_url 2014-11-01-overview-java-8 %}), using an example
from the `File` class to list `csv` files:

{% highlight java %}
File[] csvFiles = new File(".")
                    .listFiles(pathname -> pathname.getAbsolutePath().endsWith("csv"));
{% endhighlight %}

Here, we are passing a lambda expression to the `listFiles` method that takes
one input parameter and returns a boolean value. I also mentioned that you can
assign lambdas to variables, so the previous code is functionally equivalent to:

{% highlight java %}
FileFilter csvFilter = pathname -> pathname.getAbsolutePath().endsWith("csv");
File[] csvFiles = new File(".").listFiles(csvFilter);
{% endhighlight %}

How did we use to do that before Java 8? Like this:

{% highlight java %}
File[] csvFiles = new File(".").listFiles(new FileFilter() {
    @Override
    public boolean accept(File pathname) {
      return pathname.getAbsolutePath().endsWith("csv");
    }
});
{% endhighlight %}

You have to admit that the snippet using a lambda expression looks much more
concise and cleaner. In the last snippet we have to create an anonymous class
with an `accept` method (with all the verbosity that it implies). In the first
one, we just need to specify our logic.

This brings an interesting question, if the `listFiles` method takes a parameter
of `FileFilter` type (which is an interface), how come we can pass a lambda
instead? We can do this because the `FileFilter` interface is a functional
interface.

# Functional interfaces
In a nutshell, a functional interface is an interface that specifies exactly
**one** abstract method. So the `FileFilter` interface we saw before is
specified as:

{% highlight java %}
@FunctionalInterface
public interface FileFilter {
  boolean accept(File pathname);
}
{% endhighlight %}

Another example, is the `Runnable` interface:

{% highlight java %}
@FunctionalInterface
public interface Runnable {
  public abstract void run();
}
{% endhighlight %}

You can see that both of these interfaces have a `@FunctionalInterface`
annotation. So what does that do? First it informs people who look at that
interface that it is intended to be a functional interface and that they can use
lambdas and method references wherever they are expected. Second, it works as a 
compile-time check to make sure that the interface is indeed functional. If you
add this annotation to your interface and it is not in fact functional then you
will get a nice compile error letting you know this. It is worth noting that the
annotation is not actually required but it is usually a good idea to have it
there for the reasons I mentioned before.

There's one small caveat here. We briefly discussed default
methods in the [previous post]({% post_url 2014-11-01-overview-java-8 %}), which
are methods whose implementation code can be written in an interface. Default
methods do not count for the "exactly one abstract method" rule of functional
interfaces so you can effectively have a functional interface with one abstract
method and one or more default methods.

# Some useful functional interfaces
Now that we know what a functional interface is and how it can be used, lets
look at some pretty useful interfaces provided by Java in its
`java.function.util` package

## Predicate
The predicate interface defines a simple `test` method that takes an object and
returns a boolean. It looks something like:

{% highlight java %}
@FunctionalInterface
public interface Predicate<T> {
    boolean test(T t);
}
{% endhighlight %}

This is pretty useful for things like filtering. You could have a generic method
to filter a list (this is just an example, you don't need to write this logic
and we'll see why when we go into streams):

{% highlight java %}
public static <T> List<T> filter(List<T> list, Predicate<T> predicate) {
  List<T> result = new ArrayList<>();
  for (T elem : list) {
    if (predicate.test(elem)) {
      result.add(elem);
    }
  }
  return result;
}
{% endhighlight %}

And then create a predicate for your particular object. For example, a predicate
that given a `User` returns true if his age is greater than or equal to 18:

{% highlight java %}
public enum Sex {
  MALE, FEMALE
}

public class User {
  private final int age;
  private final String name;
  private final Sex sex;

  public User(int age, String name, Sex sex) {
    this.age = age;
    this.name = name;
    this.sex = sex;
  }

  public int getAge() {
    return age;
  }

  public boolean isMale() {
    return MALE.equals(sex);
  }
}

Predicate<User> predicate = user -> user.getAge() >= 18;
{% endhighlight %}

A pretty useful functionality about predicates is that they can be composed
together to form more complex ones. For instance, what do you do if suddenly you
want a new `User` predicate that returns true for all users who are less than
18? Do you create a new predicate like the previous one but changing the `>=` by
`<`? Luckily, you don't have to because the `Predicate` interface provides 3
methods to compose several predicates: `and`, `or` and `negate`. So the previous
example could be written as:

{% highlight java %}
Predicate<User> older = user -> user.getAge() >= 18;
Predicate<User> younger = older.negate();
{% endhighlight %}

Similarly, if we want a predicate that returns true for all the male users older
or equal to 18, we could write it as:

{% highlight java %}
Predicate<User> older = user -> user.getAge() >= 18;
Predicate<User> adultMales = older.and(User::isMale);
{% endhighlight %}

That last example shows that we can use method references where a `Predicate` is
expected. In fact, we can use a method reference wherever a functional interface
is expected. We quickly saw method references in the 
[previous post]({%post_url 2014-11-01-overview-java-8 %}) but we'll discuss more 
about them later on.

## Function
The java.util.function.Function interface is defined as:

{% highlight java %}
@FunctionalInterface
public interface Function<T, R> {
  R apply(T t);
}
{% endhighlight %}

What this basically does is take an input of type `T` and transform it somehow
to return an object of type `R`. Note that the `Predicate` interface can be seen
as a special case of a `Function` where `R` is always a boolean value. Following
our `User` examples, imagine we want a function that given an `User` instance it
returns that user's name length. We could write this function like this:

{% highlight java %}
Function<User,Integer> nameLength = user -> user.getName().length();
{% endhighlight %}

Like predicates, the `Function` interface also has some useful methods to
compose several functions. The two methods offered are `compose` and `andThen`.
The difference between them is subtle but important. To understand this better,
imagine we have the following 2 functions:

{% highlight java %}
Function<Integer,Integer> sumOne = number -> number + 1;
Function<Integer,Integer> duplicate = number -> number * 2;
{% endhighlight %}

We can then create 2 new functions in the following way:

{% highlight java %}
Function<Integer, Integer> composed = sumOne.compose(duplicate);
Function<Integer, Integer> andThen = sumOne.andThen(duplicate);

System.out.println(composed.apply(2));
System.out.println(andThen.apply(2));
{% endhighlight %}

The `composed` function will first apply `duplicate` and then apply `sumOne` on
the result. In other words, composing `sumOne` with `duplicate` will result in
`sumOne(duplicate(x))` and the first System.out will print 5. The `andThen`
function will do exactly the opposite, it will first apply `sumOne` and then
apply `duplicate` on the result. In this case the second System.out will print
6.

## Consumer
The java.util.function.Consumer interface defines an `accept` method that takes
a paramter of type `T` and returns no value. In other words:

{% highlight java%}
@FunctionalInterface
public interface Consumer<T> {
    void accept(T t);
}
{% endhighlight %}

This interface is useful when you want to access an element and perform some
operation on it. For instance, starting with Java 8, lists have a `forEach`
method where you can pass a `Consumer<T>` and this function will be applied to
each element on the list. 

So imagine that you want to print to `System.out` each element on a list. You
could do that in the following way:

{% highlight java %}
List<String> users = Arrays.asList("java","8","rocks");
users.forEach(elem -> System.out.println(elem));
{% endhighlight %}

The implementation of the `forEach` method is actually quite straightforward:

{% highlight java %}
void forEach(Consumer<? super T> action) {
  for (T t : this) {
    action.accept(t);
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

# Primitive functional interfaces
We saw a couple of generic, quite useful functional interfaces provided by the
language: `Predicate<T>`, `Function<T,R>` and `Consumer<T>`. This is great for most
cases where you want to use this interfaces for your own classes. But what
happens when you need something like this for primitive types: `int`, `double`
or `boolean` for instance?

In Java, each primitive type has a corresponding [wrapper
class](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/data/numberclasses.html). So
`int` has an `Integer` class and `boolean` has a `Boolean`. Additionally, Java
can handle conversions between these types for you automatically. This concept,
known as
[autoboxing/unboxing](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/data/autoboxing.html)
is what allows you to write code like this:

{% highlight java %}
List<Integer> numbers = new ArrayList<>();
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  numbers.add(i);
}
{% endhighlight %}

This lets the developer write less code because he doesn't need to worry about
explicitly converting one type to the other. However, there is a performance
impact involved. Is probably not a big deal if you do it occasionally here and
there but when you are doing a boxing or unboxing on every iteration in a big
list you will see a difference.

Going back to our functional interfaces, say you want to define a predicate that
takes an `int` and returns a `boolean` telling us whether the number is odd or
not. You can not define a `Predicate<int>` because `int` is not a class but you
could do something like this:

{% highlight java %}
Predicate<Integer> isOdd = i -> i % 2 == 1;
isOdd.test(15);
{% endhighlight %}

What happens when you call this predicate with an `int` is that this parameter
gets autoboxed into an `Integer`. Again, this might not really be an issue if
you are not using this `Predicate` in critical areas of your application or
inside big loops.

If you don't want your parameters boxed automatically for you and want to really
use primitive types instead, Java 8 provides primitive specializations of its
functional interfaces. In our example, we could use the `IntPredicate`
interface, whose `accept` method only takes `int` parameters:

{% highlight java %}
@FunctionalInterface
public interface IntPredicate {
  boolean test(int value);
}
{% endhighlight %}

Therefore, our previous example could be rewritten as:

{% highlight java %}
IntPredicate isOdd = i -> i % 2 == 1;
isOdd.test(15);
{% endhighlight %}

Now, the parameter to the `test` method is treated as a primitive `int` all the
way avoiding boxing and unboxing operations.

This primitive specializations extend to other types with similar names. So you
are going to find `DoublePredicate`, `IntFunction`, `LongConsumer` and so on.

# Method references
Lambda expressions are undoubtedly a great construct to make your code more
compact. However, some times all you do in your lambda is to call an individual
method potentially passing some parameter to it. In these cases you can often
replace your lambda expression by a method reference. 

Method references are compact ways to create lambda expressions for methods that
already have a name. For instance, in the previous section we saw an example of
the `forEach` method:

{% highlight java %}
List<String> users = Arrays.asList("java","8","rocks");
users.forEach(elem -> System.out.println(elem));
{% endhighlight %}

Here, our lambda expression is only calling the `System.out.println` method.
Therefore, we could rewrite it like this:

{% highlight java %}
List<String> users = Arrays.asList("java","8","rocks");
users.forEach(System.out::println);
{% endhighlight %}

# Conclusion
Lambdas are one of the main additions to Java 8. And while you can still write
code the way you used to do it before (using anonymous classes) chances are that
you will start to see more and more lambdas going around other people code. So
you should at least know they exist and how they can be used effectively.

Functional interfaces are not a small addition to the language but the fact that
you can use a lambda expression or method reference every time you expect an
interface is a huge deal. Is not only the fact that you remove a lot of
boilerplate code but also that by doing that you are actually making your code
easier to read and maintain. Having this concept applied to a lot of the
existing language interfaces will also help a lot. 

Take advantage of the interfaces defined for you in `java.util.function`. They
are abstractions that come up quite frequently in practice and are very powerful
given the way you can combine them. If you need to use them for primitive types
like int or double remember that you have the option to use primitive
specializations of these interfaces to avoid the performance cost of autoboxing.
